as a man
thinketh by james allen read by
randy scott originally self-published in
1903 by james allen
this recording is production of the
master key society
copyright 2021 master key society
mind is the master power that molds and
makes
a man is mind and evermore he takes
the tool of thought and shaping what he
wills
brings forth a thousand joys a thousand
ills
he thinks in secret and it comes to pass
environment is but his looking glass
forward this little volume the result of
meditation and experience
is not intended as an exhaustive
treatise on the much written upon
subject of the power of thought
it is suggestive rather than explanatory
its object being to stimulate men and
women to the discovery and perception of
the truth that
they themselves are makers of themselves
by virtue of the thoughts which they
choose and encourage
that mind is the master weaver both of
the inner garment of character
and the outer garment of circumstance
and that
as they may have hitherto woven in
ignorance and pain
they may now weave in enlightenment and
happiness
james allen thought and character
the aphorism as a man thinketh in his
heart
so is he not only embraces the whole of
a man's being
but is so comprehensive as to reach out
to every condition and circumstance of
his life
a man is literally what he thinks
his character being the complete sum of
all his thoughts
as the plant springs from and could not
be without the seed
so every act of a man springs from the
hidden seeds of thought
and could not have appeared without them
this applies equally to those
acts called spontaneous and
unpremeditated
as to those which are deliberately
executed
act is the blossom of thought and joy
and suffering are its fruits
thus does a man garner in the sweet and
bitter fruitage of his own husbandry
thought in the mind hath made us what we
are
by thought was wrought and built if a
man's mind hath evil thoughts
pain comes on him as comes the wheel the
ox behind
if one endure in purity of thought joy
follows him
as his own shadow sure man
is a growth by law and not a creation by
artifice
and cause and effect is as absolute and
undeviating in the hidden realm of
thought
as in the world of visible and material
things
a noble and godlike character is not a
thing of favor or chance
but is the natural result of continued
effort in right
thinking the effect of long-cherished
association with god-like thoughts
an ignoble and bestial character by the
same process
is the result of the continued harboring
of groveling thoughts
man is made or unmade by himself in the
armory of thought he forges the weapons
by which he destroys himself
he also fashions the tools with which he
builds for himself heavenly mansions of
joy and strength
and peace by the right choice and true
application of thought
man ascends to the divine perfection by
the abuse and wrong application of
thought
he descends below the level of the beast
between these two extremes are all the
grades of character
and man is their maker and master
of all the beautiful truths pertaining
to the soul which have been restored and
brought to light in this age none is
more gladdening or fruitful of divine
promise and confidence than this
that man is the master of thought the
molder of character
and the maker and shaper of condition
environment
and destiny as a being of power
intelligence and love and the lord of
his own thoughts
man holds the key to every situation and
contains within himself
the transforming and regenerative agency
by which he may make himself
what he wills man is always the master
even in his weaker and most abandoned
state
but in his weakness and degradation he
is the foolish master who misgoverns his
household
when he begins to reflect upon his
condition and to search
diligently for the law upon which his
being is established
he then becomes the wise master
directing his energies with intelligence
in fashioning his thoughts to fruitful
issues
such is the conscious master and man can
only thus become by discovering within
himself
the laws of thought which discovery is
totally a matter of application
self-analysis and experience
only by much searching and mining are
gold and diamonds obtained
and man can find every truth connected
with his being
if he will dig deep into the mind of his
soul
and that he is the maker of his
character the moulder
of his life and the builder of his
destiny he may
unerringly prove if he will watch
control and alter his thoughts tracing
their effects upon himself
upon others and upon his life and
circumstances
linking cause and effect by patient
practice and investigation
and utilizing his every experience even
to the most trivial
everyday occurrence as a means of
obtaining that knowledge of himself
which is
understanding wisdom power
in this direction as in no other is the
law absolute that he that seeketh
findeth and to him that knocketh it
shall be opened
for only by patience practice and
ceaseless
importunity can a man enter the door of
the temple
of knowledge effective thought on
circumstances
man's mind may be likened to a garden
which may be intelligently cultivated or
allowed to run wild
but whether cultivated or neglected it
must and
will bring forth if no useful seeds are
put
into it then an abundance of useless
weed seeds will
fall therein and will continue to
produce their kind
just as a gardener cultivates his plot
keeping it free from weeds
and growing the flowers and fruits which
he requires so may a man
tend the garden of his mind weeding out
all the wrong
useless and impure thoughts and
cultivating toward perfection the
flowers and fruits of right
useful and pure thoughts by pursuing
this process
a man sooner or later discovers that he
is the master gardener of his soul
the director of his life he also reveals
within himself the laws of thought
and understands with ever increasing
accuracy
how the thought forces and mind elements
operate in the shaping of his character
circumstances and destiny
thought and character are one and his
character can only manifest and discover
itself
through environment and circumstance the
outer conditions of a person's life will
always be found to be harmoniously
related to his inner state
this does not mean that a man's
circumstances at any given time are an
indication of his
entire character but that those
circumstances are so
intimately connected with some vital
thought element within himself that
for the time being they are
indispensable to his development
every man is where he is by the law of
his being
the thoughts which he has built into his
character have brought him there
and in the arrangement of his life there
is no element of chance
but all is the result of a law which
cannot err
this is just as true of those who feel
out of harmony
with their surroundings as of those who
are contented with them
as a progressive and evolving being man
is where he is that he may learn that he
may grow
and as he learns the spiritual lesson
which any circumstance contains for him
it passes away and gives place to other
circumstances
man is buffeted by circumstances so long
as he believes himself to be the
creature of outside conditions
but when he realizes that he is a
creative power
and that he may command the hidden soil
and seeds of his being
out of which circumstances grow he then
becomes the rightful master of himself
that circumstances grow out of thought
every man knows who has
for any length of time practice
self-control and self-purification
for he will have noticed that the
alteration in his circumstances has been
an exact ratio
with his altered mental condition so
true is this that when a man earnestly
applies himself to remedy the defects in
his character
he makes swift and marked progress he
passes rapidly through a succession of
vicissitudes
the soul attracts that which it secretly
harbors that which it loves
and also that which it fears it reaches
the height of its cherished aspirations
it falls to the level of its unchastened
desires
and circumstances are the means by which
the soul receives its own
every thought seeds sown or allowed to
fall into the mind
and to take root there produces its own
blossoming sooner or later into act and
bearing its own fruitage of opportunity
and circumstance
good thoughts bear good fruit bad
thoughts
bad fruit the outer world of
circumstance shapes itself to the inner
world of thought
and both pleasant and unpleasant
external conditions are factors
which make for the ultimate good of the
individual
as the reaper of his own harvest man
learns both by suffering
and bliss following the inmost desires
aspirations thoughts by which he allows
himself to be dominated
pursuing the willow the wisps of impure
imaginings or steadfastly walking the
highway of strong and high endeavor
a man at last arrives at their
fruitation and fulfillment
in the outer conditions of his life the
laws of growth and adjustment everywhere
obtains a man does not come to the alms
house or the jail
by the tyranny of fate or circumstance
but by the pathway of grovelling
thoughts
and base desires nor does a pure-minded
man fall suddenly into crime by stress
of any mere external force the criminal
thought had long been secretly fostered
in the heart
and the hour of opportunity revealed its
gathered power
circumstance does not make the man it
reveals him
to himself no such conditions can exist
as descending into vice
and its attendant sufferings apart from
vicious inclinations
or ascending into virtue and its pure
happiness without the continued
cultivation of virtuous aspirations
and man therefore as the lord and master
of thought
is the maker of himself the shaper and
author of environment
even at birth the soul comes to its own
and through every step of its earthly
pilgrimage it attracts those
combinations of conditions which reveal
itself
which are the reflections of its own
purity and impurity
its strength and weakness men
do not attract that which they want but
that which they
are their whims fancies
and ambitions are thwarted at every step
but their inmost thoughts and desires
are fed with their own food
be it foul or clean the divinity that
shapes our ends
is in ourselves it is our very self
only himself manacles man thought and
action
are the galores of fate they imprison
being base they are also the angels of
freedom
they liberate being noble not what he
wishes and prays for
does a man get but what he justly earns
his wishes and prayers are only
gratified and answered when they
harmonize with his thoughts
and actions in the light of this truth
what then is the meaning of fighting
against circumstances
it means that a man is continually
revolting against an effect
without while all the time he is
nourishing and preserving its
cause in his heart that cause may take
the form of a conscious vice or an
unconscious weakness but whatever it is
it stubbornly retards the efforts of its
possessor
and thus calls aloud for remedy
men are anxious to improve their
circumstances but are unwilling to
improve themselves
they therefore remain bound the man who
does not shrink from self-crucifixion
can never fail to accomplish the object
upon which his heart is set
this is as true of earthly as of
heavenly things
even the man whose sole object is to
acquire wealth must be
prepared to make great personal
sacrifices before he can accomplish his
object
and how much more so he would realize a
strong and well-poised
life here is a man who is wretchedly
poor
he is extremely anxious that his
surroundings and home comfort should be
improved
yet all the time he shirks his work and
considers he is justified in trying to
deceive his employer on the ground
of the insufficiency of his wages
such a man does not understand the
simplest rudiments of those principles
which are the basis of true prosperity
and is not only totally unfitted to rise
out of his wretchedness
but is actually attracting to himself a
still
deeper wretchedness by dwelling in and
acting out
indolent deceptive and unmanly thoughts
here is a rich man who is the victim of
a painful and persistent disease
as the result of gluttony he is willing
to give large sums of money to get rid
of it
but he will not sacrifice his gluttonous
desires
he wants to gratify his taste for rich
and unnatural viens
and have his health as well such a man
is totally unfit to have health because
he has not yet learned the first
principles
of a healthy life here is an employer of
labor who adopts crooked measures to
avoid paying the regulation wage
and in the hope of making larger profits
reduces the wages of his work people
such a man is altogether unfitted for
prosperity
and when he finds himself bankrupt both
as regards
reputation and riches he blames
circumstances
not knowing that he is the sole author
of his condition
i have introduced these three cases
merely as illustrative of the truth that
man
is the causer though nearly always is
unconsciously
of his circumstances and that whilst
aiming at a good end
he is continually frustrating its
accomplishment by encouraging thoughts
and desires
which cannot possibly harmonize with
that end
such cases could be multiplied and
varied almost indefinitely
but this is not necessary as the reader
can
if he so resolves trace the action of
the laws of thought in his own mind and
life
and until this is done mere external
facts cannot serve as a ground of
reasoning
circumstances however are so complicated
thought is so deeply rooted
and the conditions of happiness vary so
vastly with individuals that a man's
entire soul condition
although it may be known to himself
cannot be judged by another from the
external aspect of his life alone
a man may be honest in certain
directions yet suffer probations
a man may be dishonest in certain
directions yet acquire wealth
but the conclusion usually form that the
one man fails because of his particular
honesty
and that the other prospers because of
his particular dishonesty
is the result of a superficial judgment
which assumes that the dishonest man is
almost totally corrupt
and the honest man almost entirely
virtuous
in the light of a deeper knowledge and
wider experience such judgment is found
to be erroneous
the dishonest man may have some
admirable virtues
which the other does not possess in the
honest man obnoxious
vices which are absent in the other the
honest man reaps the good results of his
honest thoughts and acts
he also brings upon himself the
sufferings which his vices produce
the dishonest man likewise garners his
own suffering
and happiness it is pleasing to human
vanity to believe that one suffers
because of one's virtue
but not until a man has extirpated ever
sickly bitter and impure thought from
his mind
and washed every sinful stain from his
soul can he be in a position to know and
declare that his sufferings are the
result of his good
and not of his bad qualities and on the
way to
yet long before he has reached that
supreme perfection
he will have found working in his mind
and life the great law which is
absolutely just and which cannot
therefore give good for evil
evil for good possessed of such
knowledge
he will then know looking back upon his
past ignorance and blindness
that his life is and always was justly
ordered
and that all his past experiences good
and bad
were the equitable outworking of his
evolving
yet unevolved self good thoughts and
actions can never produce
bad results bad thoughts and actions can
never produce
good results this is but saying that
nothing can come from corn but corn
nothing from nettles but nettles men
understand this law in the natural world
and work with it but few understand it
in the mental and moral world
though its operation there is just as
simple and undeviating
and they therefore do not cooperate with
it
suffering is always the effect of wrong
thought in some direction
it is an indication that the individual
is out of harmony with himself
with the law of his being the soul and
supreme use of suffering is to
purify to burn out all that is useless
and
impure suffering ceases for him who is
pure
there could be no object in burning gold
after the dross had been removed
and a perfectly pure and enlightened
being could not suffer
the circumstances which a man encounters
with suffering
are the result of his own mental and
harmony the circumstances which a man
encounters with blessedness
are the result of his own mental harmony
blessedness
not material possessions is the measure
of right thought
wretchedness not lack of material
possessions is the measure of wrong
thought
a man may be cursed and rich he may be
blessed
and poor blessedness and riches are only
joined together when the riches are
rightly and wisely used
and the poor man only descends into
wretchedness when he regards his lot as
a burden
unjustly imposed
indigence and indulgence are the two
extremes of wretchedness
they are both equally unnatural and the
result of mental disorder
a man is not rightly conditioned until
he is a happy
healthy and prosperous being and
happiness
health and prosperity are the result of
a harmonious adjustment of the inner
with the outer of the man with his
surroundings
a man only begins to be a man when he
ceases to whine and revel
and commences to search for the hidden
justice which regulates his life
and as he adapts his mind to that
regulating factor he ceases to accuse
others as the cause of his condition
and builds himself up in strong and
noble thoughts
ceases to kick against circumstances but
begins to
use them as aids to his more rapid
progress
and as a means of discovering the hidden
powers and possibilities within himself
law not confusion is the dominating
principle in the universe
justice not injustice is the soul and
substance of life
and righteousness not corruption is the
molding and moving force in the
spiritual government of the world
this being so man has but to write
himself to find that the universe is
right
and during the process of putting
himself right he will find that as he
alters his thoughts towards things and
other people
things and other people will alter
towards him the proof
of this truth is in every person and it
therefore admits of easy investigation
by
systematic introspection and
self-analysis
let a man radically alter his thoughts
and he will be astonished at the rapid
transformation it will affect
in the material conditions of his life
men imagine that
thought can be kept secret but it cannot
it rapidly crystallizes into habit and
habits solidifies into circumstance
bastille thoughts crystallize into
habits of drunkenness and sensuality
which solidify in the circumstances of
destitution and disease
impure thoughts of every kind
crystallize into inevitable
and confusing habits which solidify into
distracting
and adverse circumstances thoughts of
fear
doubt and indecision crystallize into
weak
unmanly and irresolute habits which
solidify into circumstances of failure
indigence and slavish dependence lazy
thoughts crystallize into habits of
uncleanliness and dishonesty which
solidify into circumstances of foulness
and beggary hateful and condemnatory
thoughts crystallize into habits of
accusation and violence
which solidify under circumstances of
injury and persecution
selfish thoughts of all kinds
crystallize into habits of self-seeking
which solidify into circumstances more
or less distressing
on the other hand beautiful thoughts of
all kinds crystallize into habits of
grace
and kindliness which solidify into
genial and sunny circumstances
pure thoughts crystallize into habits of
temperance and self-control
which solidify into circumstances of
repose and peace
thoughts of courage self-reliance and
decision
crystallize into manly habits which
solidify into circumstances of
success plenty and freedom
energetic thoughts crystallize into
habits of cleanliness and industry
which solidify in a circumstances of
pleasantness
gentle and forgiving thoughts
crystallize into habits of gentleness
which solidify into protective and
preservative circumstances
loving and unselfish thoughts
crystallize into habits of
self-forgetfulness for others
which solidify into circumstances of
sure and abiding prosperity
and true riches a particular train of
thought persisted in
be it good or bad cannot fail to produce
its results on the character and
circumstances
a man cannot directly choose his
but he can choose his thoughts and so
indirectly
yet surely shape his circumstances
nature helps every man to the
gratification of the thoughts
which he most encourages and
opportunities are presented which will
most
speedily bring to the surface both the
good and evil thoughts
let a man cease from his sinful thoughts
and all the world will soften towards
him
and be ready to help him let him put
away his weakly and sickly thoughts
and lo opportunities will spring up on
every hand to aid his strong resolves
let him encourage good thoughts and no
hard fate shall bind him down to
wretchedness and shame
the world is your kaleidoscope and the
varying combinations of colors
which at every succeeding moment it
presents to you are the
exquisitely adjusted pictures of your
ever moving thoughts
so you will be what you will to be let
failure find its foss content
in that poor word environment but spirit
scorns it and is free
it masters time it conquers space it
cows that boastful trickster chance
and bids the tyrant circumstance uncrown
and fill a servant's place the human
will
that force unseen the offspring of a
deathless soul
can hew away to any goal though
walls of granite intervene be not
impatient in delays
but wait as one who understands when
spirit rises and commands
the gods are ready to obey
effective thought on health and the body
the body is the servant of the mind it
obeys the operations of the mind whether
they be deliberately chosen or
automatically expressed
at the bidding of unlawful thoughts the
body sinks rapidly into disease
and decay at the command of glad and
beautiful thoughts
it becomes clothed with youthfulness and
beauty
disease and health like circumstances
are rooted in thought
sickly thoughts will express themselves
through a sickly body
thoughts of fear have been known to kill
a man as speedily as a bullet
and they are continually killing
thousands of people just as surely
though less rapidly the people who live
in fear of disease are the people who
get it
anxiety quickly demoralizes the whole
body
and lays it open to the entrance of
disease
while impure thoughts even if not
physically indulged
will soon shatter the nervous system
strong
pure and happy thoughts build up the
body in vigor and grace
the body is a delicate and plastic
instrument which responds readily to the
thoughts by which it is impressed
and habits of thought will produce their
own effects good or bad
upon it men will continue to have impure
and poisoned blood
so long as they propagate unclean
thoughts
out of a clean heart comes a clean life
and a clean body
out of a defiled mind proceeds a defiled
life and a corrupt body
thought is the fount of action life and
manifestation
make the fountain pure and all will be
pure
change of diet will not help a man who
will not change his thoughts
when a man makes his thoughts pure he no
longer desires
impure food clean thoughts
make clean habits the so-called saint
who does not wash his body
is not a saint he who has strengthened
and purified his thoughts does not need
to consider the malevolent microbe
if you would protect your body guard
your mind
if you would renew your body beautify
thoughts of malice envy disappointment
despondency
robbed the body of its health and grace
a sour face does not come by chance
it is made by sour thoughts wrinkles
that mar
are drawn by folly passion and pride
i know a woman of 96 who has the bright
innocent face of a girl
i know a man well under middle age whose
face is drawn into inharmonious contours
the one is the result of a sweet and
sunny disposition
the other is the outcome of passion and
discontent
as you cannot have a sweet and wholesome
abode unless you admit the air and
sunshine freely into your rooms
so a strong body and a bright happy or
serene countenance
can only result from the free admittance
into the mind of thoughts of joy
and good will and serenity
on the faces of the aged there are
wrinkles made by sympathy
others by strong and pure thought and
others are carved by passion
who cannot distinguish them with those
who have lived righteously age is calm
peaceful
and softly mellowed like the setting sun
i have recently seen a philosopher on
his deathbed he was not old except in
years he died as sweetly and peacefully
as he had lived
there is no physician like cheerful
thought for dissipating the ills of the
body
there is no comforter to compare with
goodwill for dispersing the shadows of
grief and sorrow
to live continually in thoughts of ill
will cynicism
suspicion and envy is to be confined in
a self-made
prison whole but to think well of all
to be cheerful with all to patiently
learn to find the good in
all such unselfish thoughts are the very
portals of heaven
and to dwell day by day in thoughts of
peace toward every creature
will bring a bounding peace to their
possessor
thought and purpose until thought is
linked with purpose there is no
intelligent accomplishment
with the majority the bark of thought is
allowed to drift upon the ocean of life
aimlessness is a vice and such drifting
must not continue for
him who would steer clear of catastrophe
and destruction
they who have no central purpose in
their life fall an easy prey to petty
worries
fears troubles and self-pityings
all of which are indications of weakness
which lead just as surely as
deliberately planned sins
though by a different route to failure
unhappiness and loss for weakness cannot
persist in a power evolving universe
a man should conceive of a legitimate
purpose in his heart
and set out to accomplish it he should
make this purpose the centralizing point
of his thoughts
it may take the form of a spiritual
ideal or it may be a worldly object
according to his nature at the time
being which whatever
it is he should steadily focus his
thought forces upon the object
which he has set before him he should
make this purpose his supreme duty
and should devote himself to its
attainment not allowing his thoughts to
wander away
into ephemeral fancies longings
and imaginings this is the royal road to
self-control and true concentration of
thought
even if he fails again and again to
accomplish his purpose
as he necessarily must until weakness is
overcome
the strength of character gained will be
the measure of his
true success and this will form a new
starting point for future power
and triumph those who are not prepared
for the apprehension of a
great purpose should fix the thoughts
upon the thoughtless performer of their
duty
no matter how insignificant their task
may appear
only in this way can the thoughts be
gathered and focused
and resolution and energy be developed
which being done
there is nothing which may not be
accomplished
the weakest soul knowing its own
weakness and believing this truth
that strength can only be developed by
effort and practice
will thus believing at once begin to
exert itself
and adding effort to effort patience to
patience
and strength to strength will never
cease
to develop and will at last grow
divinely strong
as the physically weak man can make
himself strong by careful and patient
training
so the man of weak thoughts can make
them strong by exercising himself
in right thinking to put away
aimlessness and weakness
and to begin to think with purpose is to
enter the ranks
of those strong ones who only recognize
failure
as one of the pathways to attainment who
make all conditions
serve them and who think strongly
attempt fearlessly
and accomplish masterfully
having conceived of his purpose a man
should mentally mark out a straight
pathway to its achievement looking
neither to the right
nor the left doubts and fears should be
rigorously excluded
they are disintegrating elements which
break up the straight line of effort
rendering it crooked ineffectual useless
thoughts of doubt and fear never
accomplished anything
and never can they always lead to
failure
purpose energy power to do and all
strong thoughts cease when doubt and
fear creep in
the will to do springs from the
knowledge that we can
do doubt and fear are the great enemies
of knowledge
and he who encourages them who does not
slay them
thwarts himself at every step he who has
conquered doubt and fear has conquered
failure
his every thought is allied with power
and all difficulties are bravely met
and wisely overcome his purposes are
seasonably planted and they bloom and
bring forth fruit
which does not fall prematurely to the
ground
thought allied fearlessly to purpose
becomes creative force
he who knows this is ready to become
something higher and stronger than a
mere bundle of wavering thoughts
and fluctuating sensations
he who does this has become the
conscious and intelligent wielder of his
mental powers
the thought factor in achievement all
that a man achieves
and all that he fails to achieve is the
direct result of his own thoughts
in a justly ordered universe where loss
of equipoise would mean total
destruction
individual responsibility must be
absolute
a man's weakness and strength purity and
impurity are his own
and not another man's they are brought
about by himself
and not by another and they can only be
altered by himself
never by another his condition is also
his own
and not another man's his suffering and
his happiness are evolved from within
as he thinks so he is as he continues to
think
so he remains a strong man
cannot help a weaker unless that weaker
is
willing to be helped and even then the
weak man must become strong of himself
he must by his own efforts develop the
strength which he admires in another
none but himself can alter his condition
it has been usual for men to think
and to say many men are slaves because
one is an
oppressor let us hate the oppressor
now however there is amongst an
increasing few a tendency to reverse
this judgment and to say
one man is an oppressor because many are
slaves
let us despise the slaves the truth is
that oppressor and slave are
co-operators in ignorance
and while seemingly to afflict each
other are in reality afflicting
themselves
a perfect knowledge perceives the action
of law in the weakness of the oppressed
and the misapplied power of the
oppressor a perfect
love seeing the suffering which both
states entail
condemns neither a perfect compassion
embraces both oppressor
and oppressed he who has conquered
weakness
and has put away all selfish thoughts
belongs neither to oppressor nor
oppressed he is free a man can only rise
conquer and achieve by lifting up his
thoughts
he can only remain weak and object and
miserable by refusing to lift
up his thoughts before a man can achieve
anything
even in worldly things he must lift his
thoughts above slavish animal indulgence
he may not in order to succeed give up
all animality
and selfishness by any means but a
portion of it must
at least be sacrificed a man whose
thought is
bestial indulgence could neither think
clearly nor plan methodically
he could not find and develop his latent
resources
and would fail in any undertaking not
having commenced to
manfully control his thoughts he is not
in a position to control
affairs and to adopt serious
responsibilities
he is not fit to act independently and
stand alone
but he is limited only by the thoughts
which he chooses
there can be no progress no achievement
without sacrifice
and a man's worldly success will be in
the measure that he sacrifices his
confused animal thoughts
and fixes his mind on the development of
his plans
and the strengthening of his resolution
and self-reliance
and the higher he lifts his thoughts the
more manly
upright and righteous he becomes the
greater will be his success
the more blessed and enduring will be
his achievements
the universe does not favor the greedy
the dishonest the vicious
although on the mere surface it may
sometimes appear to do so
it helps the honest the magnanimous the
virtuous
all the great teachers of the ages have
declared this in varying forms
and to prove and know it a man has but
to persist in making himself
more and more virtuous by lifting up his
thoughts
intellectual achievements are the result
of thought consecrated to the search for
knowledge
or for the beautiful and true in life in
nature
such achievements may be sometimes
connected with vanity
and ambition but they are not the
outcome of those characteristics
they are the natural outgrowth of long
and arduous effort
and of pure and unselfish thoughts
spiritual achievements are the
consummation of holy aspirations
he who lives constantly in the
conception of noble and lofty thoughts
who dwells upon all that is pure and
unselfish
will as surely as the sun reaches its
zenith and the moon it's full
become wise and noble in character
and rise into a position of influence
and blessedness
achievement of whatever kind is the
crown of effort
the diadem of thought by the aid of
self-control resolution
purity righteousness and well-directed
thought a man ascends
by the aid of animality indolence
impurity
corruption and confusion of thought a
man descends
a man may rise to high success in the
world and even to lofty altitudes in the
spiritual realm
and again descend into weakness and
wretchedness by allowing arrogant
selfish and corrupt thoughts to take
possession of him
victories attained by right thought can
only be maintained by
watchfulness many give way when success
is assured and rapidly fall back into
failure
all achievements whether in the business
intellectual or spiritual world
are the result of definitely directed
thought
are governed by the same law and are of
the same method
the only difference lies in the object
of attainment
he who would accomplish little must
sacrifice little
he who would achieve much must sacrifice
much he who would attain highly must
sacrifice greatly
visions and ideals the dreamers are the
saviors of the world
as the visible world is sustained by the
invisible so men
through all their trials and sins and
soured vocations
are nourished by the beautiful visions
of their solitary dreamers
humanity cannot forget its dreamers it
cannot let their ideals fade and die
it lives in them it knows them as the
realities which it shall one day see and
know composer sculptor painter
poet prophet sage these are all the
makers of the after world
the architects of heaven the world is
beautiful because they have lived
without them laboring humanity would
perish
he who cherishes a beautiful vision a
lofty ideal in his heart
will one day realize it columbus
cherished a vision of another world
and he discovered it copernicus fostered
the vision of a multiplicity of worlds
in a wider universe
and he revealed it buddha beheld the
vision of a spiritual world of stainless
beauty and perfect peace
and he entered into it cherish your
visions
cherish your ideals cherish the music
that stirs in your heart
the beauty that forms in your mind the
loveliness that drapes your purest
thoughts
for out of them will grow all delightful
conditions
all heavenly environment of these if you
but remain true to them
your world will at last be built
to desire is to obtain to aspire is to
achieve
shall man's bases desires receive the
fullest measure of gratification
and his purest aspiration star for lack
of substance
such is not the law such a condition of
things
can never obtain ask and receive
dream lofty dreams and as you dream so
shall
you become your vision is the promise of
what you shall one day be
your ideal is the prophecy of what you
shall at last
unveil the greatest achievement was at
first
and for a time a dream the oak sleeps in
the acorn
the bird waits in the egg and in the
highest vision of the soul
a waking angel stirs dreams are the
seedlings of realities
your circumstances may be uncongenial
but they shall not long remain
so if you but perceive an ideal and
strive to reach it
you cannot travel within and stand still
without
here is a youth hard-pressed by poverty
and labor confined long hours in an
unhealthy workshop
unschooled and lacking all the arts of
refinement
but he dreams of better things he thinks
of intelligence
of refinement of grace and beauty
he conceives of mentally builds up an
ideal condition of life
the vision of a wider liberty and a
larger scope takes possession of him
unrest urges him to action and he
utilizes all his spare time and means
small though they are to the development
of his latent powers and resources
very soon so altered has his mind become
that the workshop can no longer hold him
it has become so out of harmony with his
mentality
that it falls out of his life as a
garment is cast aside
and with the growth of opportunities
which fit the scope of his expanding
powers
he passes out of it forever years later
we see this youth as a full-grown man
we find him a master of certain forces
of the mind which he wields
with worldwide influence and almost
unequaled power
in his hands he holds the chords of
gigantic responsibilities
he speaks and lo lives are changed
men and women hang upon his words and
remold their characters
and sunlike he becomes the fixed and
luminous center round which his
innumerable destinies revolve he has
realized the vision of his youth he has
become one
with his ideal and you too
youthful reader will realize the vision
not the idol wish
of your heart be it base or beautiful or
a mixture of both
for you will always gravitate toward
that which you secretly most love
into your hands will replace the exact
results of your own thoughts
you will receive that which you earn no
more
no less whatever your present
environment may be
you will fall remain or rise with your
thoughts
your vision your ideal you will become
as small as your controlling desire
as great as your dominant aspiration in
the beautiful words of stanton kirkham
davis
you may be keeping accounts and
presently you shall walk
out of the door that for so long has
seemed
to you the barrier of your ideals and
shall find yourself
before an audience the pin still behind
your ear
the ink stains on your fingers and then
in there shall pour out the torrent of
your inspiration
you may be driving sheep and you shall
wander to the city bucolic
and open mouthed shall wander under the
intrepid guidance of the spirit into the
studio of the
master and after a time he shall say
i have nothing more to teach you and now
you have become the master
who did so recently dream of great
things while driving sheep
you shall lay down the saw and the plane
to take
upon yourself the regeneration of the
world
the thoughtless the ignorant the
indolent
seeing only the apparent effects of
things and not the things themselves
talk of luck of fortune and chance
seeing a man grow rich they say how
lucky he is
observing another become intellectual
they exclaim how highly favored he is
and noting the saintly character and
wide influence of another they remark
how chance aids him at every turn
they do not see the trials and failures
and struggles which these men
have voluntarily encountered in order to
gain their experience
have no knowledge of the sacrifices they
have made of the undaunted efforts they
have put forth
of the faith they have exercised that
they might overcome the apparent
insurmountable and realize the vision of
their heart
they do not know the darkness and the
heartaches they only see the light and
joy
and call it luck they do not see the
long and arduous journey
but only behold the pleasant goal and
call it
good fortune do not understand the
process but only perceive the result
and call it chance in all human affairs
there are
efforts and there are results
and the strength of the efforts is the
measure of the result
chance is not gifts powers
material intellectual and spiritual
possessions are the fruits of effort
they are thoughts completed objects
accomplished
visions realized the vision that you
glorify in your mind
the ideal that you enthrone in your
heart this you will build your life by
this you will become
serenity calmness of mind is one of the
beautiful jewels of wisdom
it is the result of long and patient
effort and self-control
its presence is an indication of ripened
experience
and of a more than ordinary knowledge of
the laws and operations of thought
a man becomes calm in the measure that
he understands himself as a thought
evolved being
for such knowledge necessitates the
understanding of others as the result of
thought
and as he develops a right understanding
and sees more and more clearly the
internal relations of things by the
action of cause and effect
he ceases to fuss and fume and worry and
grieve
and remains poised steadfast serene
the calm man having learned how to
govern himself
knows how to adapt himself to others and
they in turn
reverence his spiritual strength and
feel that they can learn of him
and rely upon him the more tranquil a
man becomes the greater
is his success his influence his power
for good
even the ordinary traitor will find his
business prosperity increase as he
develops a greater self-control
and equanimity for people who always
prefer to deal with a man whose demeanor
is strongly equitable
the strong calm man is always loved and
revered
he is like a shade giving tree in a
thirsty land
or a sheltering rock in a storm who does
not love a tranquil heart
a sweet tempered balanced life it does
not matter whether it rains or shines or
what changes come to those possessing
these blessings
for they are always sweet serene and
calm that exquisite poise of character
which we call serenity is the last
lesson of culture
the fruitage of the soul it is precious
as wisdom
more to be desired than gold yea than
even
fine gold how insignificant mere money
seeking looks in comparison with a
serene life
a life that dwells in the ocean of truth
beneath the waves
beyond the reach of tempests in the
eternal calm
how many people we know who sour their
lives
who ruin all that is sweet and beautiful
by explosive tempers
who destroy their poise of character and
make bad blood
it is a question whether the great
majority of people do not ruin their
lives
and mar their happiness by lack of
self-control
how few people we meet in life who are
well balanced
who have the exquisite poise which is
characteristic
of the finished character yes
humanity surges with uncontrolled
passion is tumultuous with uncovered
grief
is blown about by anxiety and doubt only
the wise man
only he whose thoughts are controlled
and purified
makes the winds and the storms of the
soul
obey him tempest tossed souls
wherever ye may be under whatsoever
conditions ye may live
know this in the ocean of life the isles
of blessedness are smiling
and the sunny shore of your ideal awaits
your coming
keep your hand firmly upon the helm of
thought
in the bark of your soul reclines the
commanding master
he does but sleep wake him
self-control is strength right thought
is mastery calmness is power
say unto your heart peace
be still